This book introduces Bayesian data analysis and Bayesian cognitive modeling to
students and researchers in cognitive science (e.g., linguistics,
psycholinguistics, psychology, computer science), with a particular focus on
modeling data from planned experiments.  The book relies on the probabilistic
programming language Stan and the front-end R package brms. The main text in the
book only assumes that the reader is familiar with the statistical programming
language R, and has basic high school exposure to pre-calculus mathematics; the
important mathematical constructs needed for the book are introduced in the
first chapter. The R Markdown source code for the book (including code) is
publicly available at https://bruno.nicenboim.me/bayescogsci/.

Through this book, the reader will be able to develop a practical ability to
apply Bayesian modeling within their own field. The book begins with an informal
introduction to foundational topics such as probability theory, and univariate
and bi-/multivariate discrete and continuous random variables. Then, the
application of Bayes' rule for statistical inference is introduced with several
simple analytical examples that require no computing software; the main insight
here is that the posterior distribution of a parameter is a compromise between
the prior and the likelihood functions. The book then gradually builds up the
regression framework to hierarchical regression modeling (aka the linear mixed
model). Along the way, there is detailed discussion about the topic of prior
selection, and developing a well-defined workflow. Later chapters introduce the
Stan programming language, and covers advanced topics: contrast coding, model
comparison using Bayes factors and cross-validation, hierarchical models and
reparameterization, defining custom distributions,  measurement error models and
meta-analysis, multinomial processing trees, finite mixture models, and
accumulator models. These chapters provide several practical examples from
cognitive psychology and psycholinguistics.

Bruno Nicenboim is an assistant professor in the department of Cognitive Science
and Artificial Intelligence at Tilburg University in the Netherlands, working
within the area of computational psycholinguistics. Daniel J. Schad is a
cognitive psychologists and is professor of Quantitative Methods at the Health
and Medical University in Potsdam, Germany. Shravan Vasishth is professor of
psycholinguistics at the department of Linguistics at the University of Potsdam,
Germany; he is a chartered statistician (Royal Statistical Society, UK).
